# J1Sc - A simple reimplementation of the [J1 CPU](http://www.excamera.com/sphinx/fpga-j1.html) in Scala using Spinal HDL

## How to build J1Sc and Swapforth

To build the J1Sc you need first to create the VDHL / Verilog sources. The implementation is written by using *Spinal HDL* (https://github.com/SpinalHDL/SpinalHDL), hence this sources are generated by a Scala program (Spinal HDL is a powerful Scala library which can be used to generate VHDL and Verilog code.

* Install OpenJDK 8

* Install a running Scala system and sbt

* Clone the latest version of Spinal HDL (at least version 1.2.2)
   (see https://github.com/SpinalHDL/SpinalHDL)

* Setup Spinal HDL
   (see http://spinalhdl.github.io/SpinalDoc/spinal_getting_started/)

* Change directory to the new clone of SpinalHDL and run `sbt publish-local` inside

* Clone J1Sc

* Change directory to J1Sc

* Install gforth (e.g. `sudo apt-get install gforth`)

* Run `cd toolchain/forth && make && cd ../..` to build the forth core system

## A FORTH Shell/Terminal for J1Sc
Manfred Mahlow offers a really great terminal for embedded FORTH systems, which supports linux on X86 and Raspberry/Raspbian. Besides 430CamelForth , 430eForth , 4e4th, AmForth, anyForth , Mecrisp , Mecrisp-Stellaris , noForth and STM8 eForth it now supports the J1Sc with Swapforth. This solution gives a much higher comfort than the original Python-based terminals from Swapforth, hence it is suggested to use e4thcom.

Simply download e4thcom (https://wiki.forth-ev.de/doku.php/en:projects:e4thcom) and install (simply copy it to the installation directory) the e4thcom-plugin swapforth-j1sc.efc from support/e4thcom/.

Start enjoying e4thcom by the following command-line by `e4thcom-0.6.3.1 -d ttyUSB1 -b B115200 -t swapforth-j1sc`. In case anything does not work, please check for the correct transmission rate (B115200 for the Nexys4 and B38400 for the simulation) and the serial device (e.g. `/dev/tnt0` for the simulation). Make sure that the PATH-variable is set correctly and your J1Sc instance is connected to `/dev/ttyUSB1` or modify the command-line accordingly to your situation.

The descriptions below show how to work with J1Sc _without_ e4thcom. I give you advise _not_ to do so, because the shell scripts `bin/confsX` are unflexible and uncomfortable. Be warned!

## J1Sc for a Digilent Nexys4 and Nexys4DDR board

* Build J1Sc (either using the VHDL or the Verilog version) by `sbt run` (select the Nexys4X configuration to be generated). The generated files can be found in `gen/src/vhdl/J1SoC.vhd` and `gen/src/verilog/J1SoC.v`. You need `Board_<BOARDNAME>.vhd` and `PLL.vhd` in `src/main/vhdl/arch` or the corresponding Verilog versions in `src/main/verilog/arch` as toplevel for synthesis.
A Xilinx Vivado project file `J1Sc.xpr` for the VHDL version can be found in `vprj/vhdl/J1Sc` and the Verilog version is in `vprj/verilog/J1Sc`. Note that J1Sc runs fine with a 100Mhz clock on a Nexys4 DDR from Digilent. Constraint files for the Nexys4 DDR can be found in `/src/main/xilinx/nexys4ddr` the corresponding files for the Nexys4 can be found in `/src/main/xilinx/nexys4`.

* Build J1Sc (see `gen/src/vhdl` or `gen/src/verilog`) and send the .bit file to your FPGA/board (use either `src/main/vhdl/arch/Nexys4DDR/BoardNexys4DDR.vhd` or `src/main/verilog/arch/Nexys4DDR/BoardNexys4DDR.v` as toplevel module)

* `cd toolchain/forth`

* Become root or set the the permissions of your serial devices properly and run `bin/confsX`, where X is the number of the used serial port. Hence X is 0 if `/dev/ttyUSB0` should be used.

* Press the reset button (default is the "CPU reset" button on the Nexys4 DDR). You should see something like: `Contacting... established` `Loaded 142 words`

* Type `#include swapforth.fs` to load the complete FORTH system

* Turn the leds on by `$ffff leds!`

* Use the first RBG led by `5 10 10 rgbled!`

* Have fun with a working FORTH system

## J1Sc for the icoBoard

At the moment only one hardware configuration is supported

- icoBoard Version 1.1
- icoUSBaseboard: FTDI Interfacebasis (first FTDI interface for programming the FPGA)
- Pmod USBUART (second FTDI interface for serial connection)
- Pmod 8LD (simply eight leds)

Attach the [icoUSBBaseBoard](https://shop.trenz-electronic.de/en/TE0889-02-icoUSBaseboard-FTDI-Interfacebasis-fuer-das-icoBoard) to the icoBoard and connect the Pmods as shown [here](https://github.com/SteffenReith/J1Sc/blob/master/doc/misc/J1Sc_AES_IcoBoard.jpg). Hence use PMod P1 for the leds and the *upper row* (!) of PMod P3 for the UART.

Clone and install the latest version of

* yosys (clone https://github.com/cliffordwolf/yosys.git)

* next-pnr (clone https://github.com/YosysHQ/nextpnr.git)

* IceStorm (clone https://github.com/cliffordwolf/icestorm.git)

* IcoTools (clone https://github.com/cliffordwolf/icotools.git)

Now change to the cloned directory of J1Sc

* Build J1Ico by using the sbt build system. Type `sbt icoProg` to generate a Verilog version of J1Sc for your IcoBoard, synthesize it, do a place & route and to download the bit-file finally.

* Become root or set the the permissions of your serial devices properly and run `bin/confsX`, where X is the number of the used serial port. Hence X is 0 if `/dev/ttyUSB0` should be used.

* Press the reset button (the button S1 near the PMod P2 is used by default). You should see something like: `Contacting... established` `Loaded 142 words`

* Type `#include swapforth.fs` to load the complete FORTH system

* Turn the leds on by `$ff leds!`

* Have fun with a running FORTH system on your icoBoard!

At the moment the tools are able to provide an implementation which is able to run at 40 MHz. This constraint will be checked during the sbt build. Hence stay tuned and read the log-files.

In principle it is possible to use the IcoBoard together with a Raspberry PI to run J1Sc. In the case you do this, please send me (EMail: streit@streit.cc) the needed steps, because I don´t have / use this configuration.

## Gatelevel simulation of J1Sc
The latest versions for SpinalHDL (you need at least version 1.1.2) offer a complete gatelevel simulation of the generated designs. In the background SpinalHDL uses Verilator as a simulation framework and hide all the C++ stuff by another Scala library called *SpinalSim*. Moreover to connect the simulation to the host a virtual null-model cable is used. Hence

* Clone and install the latest version of Verilator from http://git.veripool.org/git/verilator

* Clone and install the latest version of tty0tty from https://github.com/SteffenReith/tty0tty.git. Load the kernel module by `insmod tty0tty.ko`. To make the installation permanent, install the kernel module according to your distribution (for Ubuntu 16.04.3 LTS ``cp tty0tty.ko /lib/modules/`uname -r`/kernel/drivers/misc`` and `depmod -a`). Alternatively you can update the tty0tty submodule by `git submodule update --init --recursive`. You can install the kernel-module by running `scripts/installTTY`.
You have to set the permission of `/dev/tnt0` and `/dev/tnt1` such that they are user read- and writeable. You can set the permissions of ´/dev/tnt0´ and ´/dev/tnt1´ by udev after every reboot automatically. For this see the udev-rule `55-tty-tnt.rules` in the directory `doc/udev`, modify it to your needs (e.g. the dialout group) and copy it e.g. to `/etc/udev/rules.d`.

* Go to your cloned J1Sc copy and type `cd toolchain/forth`

* start a terminal by `bin/confhost`

* open another shell window go to your copy of J1Sc and type `sbt test:run` to compile and run the simulation. If everything went well a small gui with some leds and a reset button will occur.

* Press the reset button. You should see something like: `Contacting... established` `Loaded 142 words` in your terminal window.

* Type `#include swapforth.fs` to load the complete FORTH system

* Turn the simulated leds on by `$ff leds!`

* Have fun with a running FORTH on the simulated J1Sc!
